[DOC] Add tail sampling policy doc (#5213)
grafana/tempo: docs/sources/tempo/configuration/grafana-alloy/tail-sampling/policies-strategies.md

---
title: Tail sampling policies and strategies
menuTitle: Tail sampling policies and strategies
description: Learn about tail sampling policies and strategies in Tempo and Grafana Alloy.

> ---

Author: ```suggestion
weight: 700
---
```

# Tail sampling policies and strategies

[Tail sampling strategies](https://grafana.com/docs/tempo/latest/configuration/grafana-alloy/tail-sampling/) consider all, or a subset, of the spans that have been collected by an OpenTelemetry Collector [distribution](https://opentelemetry.io/docs/concepts/distributions/), such as [Grafana Alloy](https://grafana.com/docs/alloy/latest/).

> Tail sampling is currently defined as part of a telemetry pipeline, and in the case of Alloy are part of the `processing` set of components, that are executed after telemetry has been received by Alloy, but before it is exported to a trace storage system (such as to Grafana Tempo or Grafana Cloud Traces).

Author: ```suggestion
Tail sampling is currently defined as part of a telemetry pipeline.
Alloy and other collectors are part of the `processing` set of components that are executed after telemetry has been received by Alloy, but before it is exported to a trace storage system such as to Grafana Tempo or Grafana Cloud Traces.
```

In the context of OpenTelemetry, tail sampling is implemented by configuring sampling policies.
A sampling policy provides the criteria that makes a decision to sample or discard a trace.
These criteria might include decisions based on specific response status codes, trace duration, attribute values, or other custom-defined rules.
Tail sampling operates as part of the telemetry processing pipeline in Alloy: it can make informed decisions based on the entire trace as opposed to isolated spans.
The sampling criteria policies are defined within a [tail sampling processor block](https://grafana.com/docs/alloy/latest/reference/components/otelcol/otelcol.processor.tail_sampling/).

For example, this basic Alloy configuration receives OTLP data either via HTTP or gRPC and passes incoming trace spans into the tail sampling processor

> The tail sampling processor then decides whether or not to sample the trace based on the probabilistic policy (this simply samples a specified percentage of traces observed randomly), before sending the trace spans to a tracing store like Tempo.

Author: ```suggestion
Before sending the trace spans to a tracing store like Tempo, the tail sampling processor decides whether or not to sample the trace based on the probabilistic policy. 
The probabilistic policy simply samples a specified percentage of traces observed randomly.
```

  }
}

// Make decisions on whether to sample or discard traces
otelcol.processor.tail_sampling "example" {
  // We define a single probabilistic processor to determine sampling
  policy {
    // The name of the policy, each policy name must be unique for this tail sampling instance
    name = "example_probabilistic"
    // The policy type is probabilistic
    type = "probabilistic"

    // Each policy type is defined by a block for the policy with specific parameters for it
    probabilistic {
      // The overall ratio of traces that have been received to randomly sample.
      // In this case 1 in 10.
      sampling_percentage = 10
    }
  }

  // Output all sampled trace spans to the OTLP exporter.
  output {
    traces = [ otelcol.exporter.otlp.example.input ]
  }
}

// The OTLP exporter sends telemetry onwards to a downstream destination.
otelcol.exporter.otlp "example" {
  // The client block defines the target destination.
  client {
    // The endpoint denotes the location of the host receiving the sampled trace
    // data. In this case a local Tempo instance.
    endpoint = "http://tempo:4318"
  }
}
```

## Policy types

> The the table lists the available policy types for the tail sampling processor. For additional information, refer to [`otelcol.processor.tail_sampling` component](https://grafana.com/docs/alloy/latest/reference/components/otelcol/otelcol.processor.tail_sampling/)` in the Alloy documentation and the [Tail Sampling Processor README](https://github.com/open-telemetry/opentelemetry-collector-contrib/blob/main/processor/tailsamplingprocessor/README.md) for the OTel Collector.

Author: ```suggestion
The table lists available policy types for the tail sampling processor. 
For additional information, refer to [`otelcol.processor.tail_sampling` component](https://grafana.com/docs/alloy/latest/reference/components/otelcol/otelcol.processor.tail_sampling/)` in the Alloy documentation and the [Tail Sampling Processor README](https://github.com/open-telemetry/opentelemetry-collector-contrib/blob/main/processor/tailsamplingprocessor/README.md) for the OTel Collector.
```

| [status_code](https://grafana.com/docs/alloy/latest/reference/components/otelcol/otelcol.processor.tail_sampling/#status_code-block)             | Samples based upon the status code, either OK, Error, or Unset.                                                | Capturing erroring traces.                                              |
| [string_attribute](https://grafana.com/docs/alloy/latest/reference/components/otelcol/otelcol.processor.tail_sampling/#string_attribute-block)   | Samples based on string attributes (resource and record) value matches.                                        | Filtering specific services or database queries.                        |
| [trace_state](https://grafana.com/docs/alloy/latest/reference/components/otelcol/otelcol.processor.tail_sampling/#trace_state-block)             | Samples based on TraceState value matches. |

> You should sample your data at the collector after metrics generation so that all traces are available to generate accurate metrics. If you generate metrics from sampled traces, the sampling affects their values.
> 
> ## Sampling policies and use cases
> 
> This section provides examples for the policy strategies.
> 

Author: ```suggestion

## Sampling policies and use cases

This section provides examples for the policy strategies.

{{< admonition type = "note" >}}
Sample data at the collector after metrics generation so that all traces are available to generate accurate metrics. If you generate metrics from sampled traces, the sampling affects their values.
{{< /admonition >}}

```

### Always sample

You can use `always_sample` when you want to capture all tracing data. This could be useful for troubleshooting.

> Refer to the <code>[always_sample](https://grafana.com/docs/alloy/latest/reference/components/otelcol/otelcol.processor.tail_sampling/#always_sample)</code> documentation for more information.` `

Author: ```suggestion
Refer to the <code>[always_sample](https://grafana.com/docs/<ALLOY_VERSION>/latest/reference/components/otelcol/otelcol.processor.tail_sampling/#always_sample)</code> documentation for more information.` `
```

```alloy
policy {
    // The example below is for the `always_sample` policy
    name = "example_always_sample"
    type = "always_sample"
}
```

### And

You use the `and` sampling policy when you want to match on multiple conditions. This example uses a probabilistic sampler and the latency sampling policy.

You can use this to look for slow requests and sample a percentage of traces.

Refer to the [`and`](https://grafana.com/docs/alloy/<ALLOY_VERSION>/reference/components/otelcol/otelcol.processor.tail_sampling/#and) documentation for more information.

```alloy
policy {
    // The example below is for the `and` sampling policy
    name = "example_and"
    type = "and"
    and {
      policies = [
        name = "example_probabilistic"
        type = "probabilistic"
        probabilistic {
         // The percentage of traces to "randomly" sample.
         sampling_percentage = 15
        },
        name = "example_latency"
        type = "latency"
        latency {
         // The minimum duration for a trace to be sampled
         threshold_ms = 5000
       }
    ]
  }
}
```

### Boolean attribute

> Use [`boolean_attribute`](https://grafana.com/docs/alloy/latest/reference/components/otelcol/otelcol.processor.tail_sampling/#boolean_attribute-block) to sample based on whether a specific span attribute with a boolean value is true or false. Any span with the named span attribute set to the given boolean value will cause the trace to be sampled.

Author: ```suggestion
Use [`boolean_attribute`](https://grafana.com/docs/alloy/<ALLOY_VERSION>/reference/components/otelcol/otelcol.processor.tail_sampling/#boolean_attribute-block) to sample based on whether a specific span attribute with a boolean value is true or false. Any span with the named span attribute set to the given boolean value will cause the trace to be sampled.
```

```alloy
policy {
    // The example below is for the `boolean_attribute` sampling policy
    name = "example_boolean_attribute"
    type = "boolean_attribute"

    boolean_attribute {
      // The span or resource attribute to be considered.
      key = "my.boolean"
      // Sample the trace if the value is boolean and set to `true`.
      value = true
    }
  }
```

### Composite

This policy, similar to `and`, is built up of multiple sub-policies.
Unlike `and`, `composite` specifies a maximum throughput of spans to be sampled each second.
Each sub-policy is given a weighting by percentage of maximum throughput.
Should the percentage be maxed out during evaluation, then the other policies in the given order are evaluated instead.
Because `composite` is evaluated just like any other sampling policy, it can be used in conjunction with others to act as final decision maker to limit trace sample output should no other policies match.
Generally, composite policies end with an `always_sample` policy type to ensure that traces are still sampled should none of the other aggregated policies inside it match.

> Refer to the [`composite`](https://grafana.com/docs/alloy/latest/reference/components/otelcol/otelcol.processor.tail_sampling/#composite-block) documentation for more information.

Author: ```suggestion
Refer to the [`composite`](https://grafana.com/docs/alloy/<ALLOY_VERSION>/reference/components/otelcol/otelcol.processor.tail_sampling/#composite-block) documentation for more information.
```

            // This acts like the default drop-through policy matcher.
            policy_order = ["composite-policy-keyvalue", "composite-policy-always"]
            // Sample any trace with a 20x status code.
            composite_sub_policy {
                name = "composite-policy-keyvalue"
                type = "string_attribute"
                string_attribute {
                    key = "http.code"
                    enabled_regex_matching = true
                    values = [ "20[0|1|2]" ]
                }
            }
            // Finalise with an `always_sample` policy type.
            composite_sub_policy {
                name = "composite-policy-always"
                type = "always_sample"
            }
            // Allocate 80% of sampling to the `string_attribute` policy.
            // The remaining 20% is allocated to the `always_sample` policy.
            rate_allocation {
                policy = "composite-policy-keyvalue"
                percent = 80
            }
            rate_allocation {
                policy = "composite-policy-always"
                percent = 20
            }
        }
    }
```

### Latency

> The latency policy is used to look for slow-running spans. For example, you can use it for performance monitoring. Slow-running spans can indicate performance bottlenecks. In the example below, we are sampling for traces that are between 3s and 10s long.

Author: ```suggestion
The latency policy is used to look for slow-running spans. 
For example, you can use it for performance monitoring. 
Slow-running spans can indicate performance bottlenecks.
The example samples for traces that are between 3s and 10s long.
```

> Refer to the <code>[latency](https://grafana.com/docs/alloy/latest/reference/components/otelcol/otelcol.processor.tail_sampling/#latency)</code> documentation for more information.

Author: ```suggestion
Refer to the [`latency`](https://grafana.com/docs/alloy/latest/reference/components/otelcol/otelcol.processor.tail_sampling/#latency) documentation for more information.
```

```alloy
policy {
    // The example below is for the `latency` sampling policy
    name = "example_latency"
    type = "latency"

    latency {
      // The minimum duration for a trace to be sampled
      threshold_ms = 3000
      // The maximum duration for a trace to be sampled
      max_duration_ms = 10000
    }
  }
```

### Numeric attribute

> The `numeric_attribute` policy lets you sample based on a number of attributes. In this example below, spans are sampled where `http.response_content_length` is between 10,000 and 500,000. The sample span below would be captured because the attribute value falls within the specified range.

Author: ```suggestion
The `numeric_attribute` policy lets you sample based on a number of attributes. 
In this example below, spans are sampled where `http.response_content_length` is between 10,000 and 500,000. 
The sample span below would be captured because the attribute value falls within the specified range.
```

> Refer to the [`numeric_attribute`](https://grafana.com/docs/alloy/latest/reference/components/otelcol/otelcol.processor.tail_sampling/#numeric_attribute) documentation for more information.

Author: ```suggestion
Refer to the [`numeric_attribute`](https://grafana.com/docs/alloy/<ALLOY_VERSION>/reference/components/otelcol/otelcol.processor.tail_sampling/#numeric_attribute) documentation for more information.
```

```alloy
policy {
    // The example below is for the `numeric_attribute` sampling policy
    name = "example_numeric_attribute"
    type = "numeric_attribute"

    numeric_attribute {
      // The span or resource attribute to be considered.
      key = "http.response_content_length"
      // The minimum value for the attribute to be sampled.
      min_value = 10000
      // The maximum value for the attribute to be sampled.
      max_value = 500000
    }
  }
```

### OTTL condition

This policy type lets you configure policies based around OTTL. The various language semantics let you write flexible and detailed sampling policies that can evaluate any trace span conditions to determine whether or not to sample a trace.
If OTTL conditions are particularly complex, this flexibility can potentially create resource overhead.

> Refer to the [`ottl_condition`](https://grafana.com/docs/alloy/latest/reference/components/otelcol/otelcol.processor.tail_sampling/#ottl_condition) documentation for more information.

Author: ```suggestion
Refer to the [`ottl_condition`](https://grafana.com/docs/alloy/<ALLOY_VERSION>/reference/components/otelcol/otelcol.processor.tail_sampling/#ottl_condition) documentation for more information.
```

```alloy
policy {
    // The example below is for the `ottl_condition` sampling policy
    name = "example_ottl_condition"
    type = "ottl_condition"

    ottl_condition {
        condition = "resource.attribute['service.name'] == 'checkout_service'"
    }
  }
```

### Probabilistic

> Probabilistic sampling lets you determine a ratio of traces that should be sampled. This is within a range of 0 to 100%, and selects the required percentage of traces from those it receives based on the number of traces per second configured. This can be combined with varying hashing salt values, should multiple collectors be carrying out sampling simultaneously (for example in a Load Balanced sampling hierarchy).

Author: ```suggestion
Probabilistic sampling lets you determine a ratio of traces that should be sampled.
This is within a range of `0` to `100%`, and selects the required percentage of traces from those it receives based on the number of traces per second configured.
This can be combined with varying hashing salt values, should multiple collectors be carrying out sampling simultaneously, for example, in a load balanced sampling hierarchy).
```

> Refer to the [`probabilistic`](https://grafana.com/docs/alloy/latest/reference/components/otelcol/otelcol.processor.tail_sampling/#probabilistic-block)documentation for more information.

Author: ```suggestion
Refer to the [`probabilistic`](https://grafana.com/docs/alloy/<ALLOY_VERSION>/reference/components/otelcol/otelcol.processor.tail_sampling/#probabilistic-block) documentation for more information.
```

    probabilistic {
	// The percentage of traces to "randomly" sample.
      sampling_percentage = 10
    }
  }
```

### Rate limiting

This policy type samples traces based around the configured spans per second.
This ensures that only traces that conform to the number of those spans available in that trace are sampled, any trace with greater than this number of spans will automatically be dropped.

Refer to the [`rate_limiting`](https://grafana.com/docs/alloy/<ALLOY_VERSION>/reference/components/otelcol/otelcol.processor.tail_sampling/#rate_limiting`) documentation for more information.

```alloy
policy {
    // The example below is for the `rate_limiting` sampling policy
    name = "example_rate_limiting"
    type = "rate_limiting"

    rate_limiting {
       // Defines the maximum number of collective spans in a second that the trace should have for it to be sampled.
	spans_per_second = 20
    }
  }
```

### Span count

The `span_count` policy accepts a window of minimum and maximum number of spans for a trace to be sampled once the decision period is reached.

Setting the minimum number of spans to zero essentially replicates the rate limiting policy.

> Refer to the [`span_count`](https://grafana.com/docs/alloy/latest/reference/components/otelcol/otelcol.processor.tail_sampling/#span_count) documentation for more information.

Author: ```suggestion
Refer to the [`span_count`](https://grafana.com/docs/alloy/<ALLOY_VERSION>/reference/components/otelcol/otelcol.processor.tail_sampling/#span_count) documentation for more information.
```

	min_spans = 5
	max_spans = 50
    }
  }
```

### Status code

The status code policy check for the span intrinsic status of `OK`, `UNSET`, or `ERROR`. The policy takes an array of statuses, so only traces with at least one span that matches these statuses are sampled.

Refer to the [`status_code`](https://grafana.com/docs/alloy/<ALLOY_VERSION>/reference/components/otelcol/otelcol.processor.tail_sampling/#status_code) documentation for more information.

```alloy
policy {
    // The example below is for the `status_code` sampling policy
    name = "example_status_code"
    type = "status_code"

    status_code {
      // An array of status codes; should any of the spans in a trace match one
      // of the status codes, it will be sampled.
      status_codes = ["ERROR"]
    }
  }
```

### String attribute

This policy examines the values of a specified string attribute key for trace’s spans, to make a sampling decision.
There are a number of configurable options, including the ability to use regular expressions, inversion matching, for example, to only sample traces that don't match a regular expression, and an LRU cache for accelerating future policy decision making.

> Refer to the [`string_attribute`](https://grafana.com/docs/alloy/latest/reference/components/otelcol/otelcol.processor.tail_sampling/#string_attribute) documentation for more information.

Author: ```suggestion
Refer to the [`string_attribute`](https://grafana.com/docs/alloy/<ALLOY_VERSION>/reference/components/otelcol/otelcol.processor.tail_sampling/#string_attribute) documentation for more information.
```

For more information, refer to [tail sampling processor block](https://grafana.com/docs/alloy/<ALLOY_VERSION>/reference/components/otelcol/otelcol.processor.tail_sampling/).

For example, this basic Alloy configuration receives OTLP data either via HTTP or gRPC and passes incoming trace spans into the tail sampling processor.
Before sending the trace spans to a tracing store like Tempo, the tail sampling processor decides whether or not to sample the trace based on the probabilistic policy.
The probabilistic policy simply samples a specified percentage of traces observed randomly.
Defaults are used for the tail sampling processor.

```alloy
// Expose receiving OTLP data
otelcol.receiver.otlp "example" {
  // Allow OTLP HTTP data on all interfaces on port 4318
  http {
    endpoint = "0.0.0.0:4318"
  }
  // Allow OTLP gRPC data on all interfaces on port 4317
  grpc {
    endpoint = "0.0.0.0:4317"
  }

  // Send all received trace spans to the tail sampling processor
  output {
    traces = [ otelcol.processor.tail_sampling.example.input ]
  }
}

// Make decisions on whether to sample or discard traces
otelcol.processor.tail_sampling "example" {

>   // We define a single probabilistic processor to determine sampling

Reviewer: I think "We" can be dropped?

Author: Yes. Good catch. 
```suggestion
  // Define a single probabilistic processor to determine sampling
```

  policy {
    // The name of the policy, each policy name must be unique for this tail sampling instance
    name = "example_probabilistic"
    // The policy type is probabilistic
    type = "probabilistic"

    // Each policy type is defined by a block for the policy with specific parameters for it
    probabilistic {
      // The overall ratio of traces that have been received to randomly sample.
      // In this case 1 in 10.
      sampling_percentage = 10
    }
  }

  // Output all sampled trace spans to the OTLP exporter.
  output {
    traces = [ otelcol.exporter.otlp.example.input ]
  }
}

// The OTLP exporter sends telemetry onwards to a downstream destination.
otelcol.exporter.otlp "example" {
  // The client block defines the target destination.
  client {
    // The endpoint denotes the location of the host receiving the sampled trace
    // data. In this case a local Tempo instance.
    endpoint = "http://tempo:4318"
  }
}
```

## Policy types

The table lists available policy types for the tail sampling processor.

> For additional information, refer to [`otelcol.processor.tail_sampling` component](https://grafana.com/docs/alloy/<ALLOY_VERSION>/reference/components/otelcol/otelcol.processor.tail_sampling/)` in the Alloy documentation and the [Tail Sampling Processor README](https://github.com/open-telemetry/opentelemetry-collector-contrib/blob/main/processor/tailsamplingprocessor/README.md) for the OTel Collector.

Reviewer: The second ` is showing up when I look at preview mode. Probably need "the" beforehand too.

Author: ```suggestion
For additional information, refer to the [`otelcol.processor.tail_sampling` component](https://grafana.com/docs/alloy/<ALLOY_VERSION>/reference/components/otelcol/otelcol.processor.tail_sampling/)` in the Alloy documentation and the [Tail Sampling Processor README](https://github.com/open-telemetry/opentelemetry-collector-contrib/blob/main/processor/tailsamplingprocessor/README.md) for the OTel Collector.
```

| Policy                                                                                                                                           | Description                                                                                                    | Useful for                                                              |
| ------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------ | -------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- | ----------------------------------------------------------------------- |

> | always_sample                                                                                                                                    | Samples all traces.                                                                                            | Debugging or collecting all data.                                       |

Reviewer: Missing link here for always_sample

Author: ```suggestion
| [always_sample](https://grafana.com/docs/alloy/<ALLOY_VERSION>/reference/components/otelcol/otelcol.processor.tail_sampling/#always-sample)                                                                                                                                    | Samples all traces.                                                                                            | Debugging or collecting all data.                                       |
```

| [span_count](https://grafana.com/docs/alloy/<ALLOY_VERSION>/reference/components/otelcol/otelcol.processor.tail_sampling/#span_count-block)               | Samples based on the minimum number of spans within the observed trace.                                        | Limiting sampled data to a specific number of spans within a trace.     |
| [status_code](https://grafana.com/docs/alloy/<ALLOY_VERSION>/reference/components/otelcol/otelcol.processor.tail_sampling/#status_code-block)             | Samples based upon the status code, either OK, Error, or Unset.                                                | Capturing erroring traces.                                              |
| [string_attribute](https://grafana.com/docs/alloy/<ALLOY_VERSION>/reference/components/otelcol/otelcol.processor.tail_sampling/#string_attribute-block)   | Samples based on string attributes (resource and record) value matches.                                        | Filtering specific services or database queries.                        |

> | [trace_state](https://grafana.com/docs/alloy/<ALLOY_VERSION>/reference/components/otelcol/otelcol.processor.tail_sampling/#trace_state-block)             | Samples based on TraceState value matches. |

Reviewer 2: Trace state is missing content for the "useful for" column. Looking over the otel docs, I see the following description: 

> trace_state: Sample based on [TraceState](https://github.com/open-telemetry/opentelemetry-specification/blob/main/specification/trace/api.md#tracestate) value matches

I'm not sure if there is any simple way of re-writing that.

Reviewer 2: I think we can keep it simple and just say "when implementing complex sampling strategies that rely on trace context"

## Sampling policies and use cases

This section provides examples for the policy strategies.

{{< admonition type = "note" >}}
Sample data at the collector after metrics generation so that all traces are available to generate accurate metrics. If you generate metrics from sampled traces, the sampling affects their values.
{{< /admonition >}}

### Always sample

You can use `always_sample` when you want to capture all tracing data. This could be useful for troubleshooting.

> Refer to the <code>[always_sample](https://grafana.com/docs/<ALLOY_VERSION>/reference/components/otelcol/otelcol.processor.tail_sampling/#always_sample)</code> documentation for more information.` `

Author: ```suggestion
Refer to the [`always_sample` policy documentation](https://grafana.com/docs/<ALLOY_VERSION>/reference/components/otelcol/otelcol.processor.tail_sampling/#always_sample) for more information.` `
```

```alloy
policy {
    // The example below is for the `always_sample` policy
    name = "example_always_sample"
    type = "always_sample"
}
```

### And

You use the `and` sampling policy when you want to match on multiple conditions. This example uses a probabilistic sampler and the latency sampling policy.

You can use this to look for slow requests and sample a percentage of traces.

> Refer to the [`and`](https://grafana.com/docs/alloy/<ALLOY_VERSION>/reference/components/otelcol/otelcol.processor.tail_sampling/#and) documentation for more information.

Reviewer: It seems to make more sense for all these refer to links to include the word documentation in the linked part vs just the policy name.

Author: I'll make this change across the file for consistency.

```alloy
policy {
    // The example below is for the `and` sampling policy
    name = "example_and"
    type = "and"
    and {
      policies = [
        name = "example_probabilistic"
        type = "probabilistic"
        probabilistic {
         // The percentage of traces to "randomly" sample.
         sampling_percentage = 15
        },
        name = "example_latency"
        type = "latency"
        latency {
         // The minimum duration for a trace to be sampled
         threshold_ms = 5000
       }
    ]
  }
}
```

### Boolean attribute

> Use [`boolean_attribute`](https://grafana.com/docs/alloy/<ALLOY_VERSION>/reference/components/otelcol/otelcol.processor.tail_sampling/#boolean_attribute-block) to sample based on whether a specific span attribute with a boolean value is true or false. Any span with the named span attribute set to the given boolean value will cause the trace to be sampled.

Reviewer: This is the only one that links the first naming of the attribute

            // This acts like the default drop-through policy matcher.
            policy_order = ["composite-policy-keyvalue", "composite-policy-always"]
            // Sample any trace with a 20x status code.
            composite_sub_policy {
                name = "composite-policy-keyvalue"
                type = "string_attribute"
                string_attribute {
                    key = "http.code"
                    enabled_regex_matching = true
                    values = [ "20[0|1|2]" ]
                }
            }
            // Finalise with an `always_sample` policy type.
            composite_sub_policy {
                name = "composite-policy-always"
                type = "always_sample"
            }
            // Allocate 80% of sampling to the `string_attribute` policy.
            // The remaining 20% is allocated to the `always_sample` policy.
            rate_allocation {
                policy = "composite-policy-keyvalue"
                percent = 80
            }
            rate_allocation {
                policy = "composite-policy-always"
                percent = 20
            }
        }
    }
```

### Latency

> The latency policy is used to look for slow-running spans.

Reviewer: `latency` is missing ``

Author: ```suggestion
The `latency` policy is used to look for slow-running spans.
```

For example, you can use it for performance monitoring.
Slow-running spans can indicate performance bottlenecks.
The example samples for traces that are between 3s and 10s long.

Refer to the [`latency`](https://grafana.com/docs/alloy/<ALLOY_VERSION>/reference/components/otelcol/otelcol.processor.tail_sampling/#latency) documentation for more information.

```alloy
policy {
    // The example below is for the `latency` sampling policy
    name = "example_latency"
    type = "latency"

    latency {
      // The minimum duration for a trace to be sampled
      threshold_ms = 3000
      // The maximum duration for a trace to be sampled
      max_duration_ms = 10000
    }
  }
```

### Numeric attribute

The `numeric_attribute` policy lets you sample based on a number of attributes.
In this example below, spans are sampled where `http.response_content_length` is between 10,000 and 500,000.
The sample span below would be captured because the attribute value falls within the specified range.

> Refer to the [`numeric_attribute`](https://grafana.com/docs/alloy/<ALLOY_VERSION>/reference/components/otelcol/otelcol.processor.tail_sampling/#numeric_attribute) documentation for more information.

Author: ```suggestion
Refer to the [`numeric_attribute` policy documentation](https://grafana.com/docs/alloy/<ALLOY_VERSION>/reference/components/otelcol/otelcol.processor.tail_sampling/#numeric_attribute) for more information.
```

```alloy
policy {
    // The example below is for the `numeric_attribute` sampling policy
    name = "example_numeric_attribute"
    type = "numeric_attribute"

    numeric_attribute {
      // The span or resource attribute to be considered.
      key = "http.response_content_length"
      // The minimum value for the attribute to be sampled.
      min_value = 10000
      // The maximum value for the attribute to be sampled.
      max_value = 500000
    }
  }
```

> ### OTTL condition

Reviewer: Maybe here or after we include the full name?

OpenTelemetry Transformation Language (OTTL)

Author: Good point. In this case, including the spelled out version makes more sense in the text since the headings all match the various policies. I've added it in the first sentence.

> This policy type lets you configure policies based around OTTL. The various language semantics let you write flexible and detailed sampling policies that can evaluate any trace span conditions to determine whether or not to sample a trace.

Author: ```suggestion
This policy type lets you configure policies based around the OpenTelemetry Transformation Language (OTTL).
The various language semantics let you write flexible and detailed sampling policies that can evaluate any trace span conditions to determine whether or not to sample a trace.
```

If OTTL conditions are particularly complex, this flexibility can potentially create resource overhead.

> Refer to the [`ottl_condition`](https://grafana.com/docs/alloy/<ALLOY_VERSION>/reference/components/otelcol/otelcol.processor.tail_sampling/#ottl_condition) documentation for more information.

Author: ```suggestion
Refer to the [`ottl_condition` policy documentation](https://grafana.com/docs/alloy/<ALLOY_VERSION>/reference/components/otelcol/otelcol.processor.tail_sampling/#ottl_condition) for more information.
```

```alloy
policy {
    // The example below is for the `ottl_condition` sampling policy
    name = "example_ottl_condition"
    type = "ottl_condition"

    ottl_condition {
        condition = "resource.attribute['service.name'] == 'checkout_service'"
    }
  }
```

### Probabilistic

> Probabilistic sampling lets you determine a ratio of traces that should be sampled.

Reviewer: `` around Probabilistic?

Reviewer: Is it probabilistic sampling that lets you do this or the policy?

Author: If my understanding is correct, it's both. The sampling method and the policy have the same name.

This is within a range of `0` to `100%`, and selects the required percentage of traces from those it receives based on the number of traces per second configured.
This can be combined with varying hashing salt values, should multiple collectors be carrying out sampling simultaneously, for example, in a load balanced sampling hierarchy).

> Refer to the [`probabilistic`](https://grafana.com/docs/alloy/<ALLOY_VERSION>/reference/components/otelcol/otelcol.processor.tail_sampling/#probabilistic-block) documentation for more information.

Author: ```suggestion
Refer to the [`probabilistic` policy documentation](https://grafana.com/docs/alloy/<ALLOY_VERSION>/reference/components/otelcol/otelcol.processor.tail_sampling/#probabilistic-block) for more information.
```

Refer to the [`rate_limiting`](https://grafana.com/docs/alloy/<ALLOY_VERSION>/reference/components/otelcol/otelcol.processor.tail_sampling/#rate_limiting`) documentation for more information.

```alloy
policy {
    // The example below is for the `rate_limiting` sampling policy
    name = "example_rate_limiting"
    type = "rate_limiting"

    rate_limiting {
       // Defines the maximum number of collective spans in a second that the trace should have for it to be sampled.
	spans_per_second = 20
    }
  }
```

### Span count

The `span_count` policy accepts a window of minimum and maximum number of spans for a trace to be sampled once the decision period is reached.

Setting the minimum number of spans to zero essentially replicates the rate limiting policy.

Refer to the [`span_count`](https://grafana.com/docs/alloy/<ALLOY_VERSION>/reference/components/otelcol/otelcol.processor.tail_sampling/#span_count) documentation for more information.

```alloy
policy {
    // The example below is for the `span_count` sampling policy
    name = "example_span_count"
    type = "span_count"

    span_count {
	min_spans = 5
	max_spans = 50
    }
  }
```

### Status code

> The status code policy check for the span intrinsic status of `OK`, `UNSET`, or `ERROR`. The policy takes an array of statuses, so only traces with at least one span that matches these statuses are sampled.

Reviewer: `status_code`?

> Refer to the [`status_code`](https://grafana.com/docs/alloy/<ALLOY_VERSION>/reference/components/otelcol/otelcol.processor.tail_sampling/#status_code) documentation for more information.

Author: ```suggestion
Refer to the [`status_code` policy documentation](https://grafana.com/docs/alloy/<ALLOY_VERSION>/reference/components/otelcol/otelcol.processor.tail_sampling/#status_code) for more information.
```

```alloy
policy {
    // The example below is for the `status_code` sampling policy
    name = "example_status_code"
    type = "status_code"

    status_code {
      // An array of status codes; should any of the spans in a trace match one
      // of the status codes, it will be sampled.
      status_codes = ["ERROR"]
    }
  }
```

### String attribute

This policy examines the values of a specified string attribute key for trace’s spans, to make a sampling decision.
There are a number of configurable options, including the ability to use regular expressions, inversion matching, for example, to only sample traces that don't match a regular expression, and an LRU cache for accelerating future policy decision making.

> Refer to the [`string_attribute`](https://grafana.com/docs/alloy/<ALLOY_VERSION>/reference/components/otelcol/otelcol.processor.tail_sampling/#string_attribute) documentation for more information.

Author: ```suggestion
Refer to the [`string_attribute` policy documentation](https://grafana.com/docs/alloy/<ALLOY_VERSION>/reference/components/otelcol/otelcol.processor.tail_sampling/#string_attribute) for more information.
```

```alloy
policy {
    // The example below is for the `string_attribute` sampling policy
    name = "example_string_attribute"
    type = "string_attribute"

    string_attribute {
      // The span or resource attribute to be considered.
      key = "db.statement"
      // Enables regular expression matching to be defined in the attribute values defined in `values`. Defaults to false for exact pattern matching.
      enabled_regex_matching = true
      // The number of LRU cache entries to save, to allow less full regexps to be run during decision making.
      cache_max_size = 100
      // Determines if a value match should determine whether the trace is sampled. `false` to only sample traces when the attribute's value matches, `true` to only sample traces where the attribute's value does not match.
      invert_match = false
      values = ["SELECT.*", "INSERT.*"]
    }
  }
```

### Trace state

The `trace_state` policy looks at the traces states associated with the incoming spans for traces and then compares the keys, should any exist, with those configured by the policy. This ensures that only traces with the relevant trace state keys are sampled.

> Refer to the [`trace_state`](https://grafana.com/docs/alloy/<ALLOY_VERSION>/reference/components/otelcol/otelcol.processor.tail_sampling/#trace_state) documentation for more information.

Author: ```suggestion
Refer to the [`trace_state` policy documentation](https://grafana.com/docs/alloy/<ALLOY_VERSION>/reference/components/otelcol/otelcol.processor.tail_sampling/#trace_state) for more information.
```

```alloy
policy {
    // The example below is for the `trace_state` sampling policy
    name = "example_trace_state"
    type = "trace_state"

    trace_state {
	key = "sampling.priority"
	values = ["1"]
    }
  }
```

## Use cases

> Sampling, both head and tail, is commonly used to ensure that only relevant traces are stored for observation. Of course, what is relevant to one user may not be relevant to another, but there are common use cases that are generally applied:

Author: ```suggestion
Sampling, both head and tail, is commonly used to ensure that only relevant traces are stored for observation.
There are common use cases that are generally applied:
```

* Reduction of stored tracing telemetry volume. Higher volumes of unused trace data can lead to unnecessary costs.

> * Negating the collection of traces that don’t really add any informational value to the overall health of an application. This includes traces that may be generated by the endpoints for healthchecks, such as liveness or readiness probes in Kubernetes.

Author: ```suggestion
* Dropping the collection of traces that don’t really add any informational value to the overall health of an application. This includes traces that may be generated by the endpoints for health checks, such as liveness or readiness probes in Kubernetes.
```

---
title: Tail sampling policies and strategies
menuTitle: Tail sampling policies and strategies

> description: Learn about tail sampling policies and strategies in Tempo and Grafana Alloy.

Reviewer: Should this say Grafana Tempo?
